Having seen a variety of algorithms for shortest
paths on weighted graphs, we now move to a
completely different problem that of computing,
what is called Minimum Cost Spanning Tree.
So, to motivate the problem, let us consider
the following example.
Suppose, we are in a district which has a
road network and after a bad cyclone, the
roads have all being damaged.
So, the first priority of the government is
to restore the roads, so that relief can be
sent to various parts of the district and
also people can start moving around again.
So, the priority is to restore enough roads,
so that everybody can move around.
So, the first criteria for the government
to restore road is to ensure connectivity.
So, given this which set of roads should the
government restore first?
So, if the main criterion is minimum connectivity,
then it should be clear that there is no point
in restoring roads which form a loop.
For instance, supposing we restore all these
four roads, then we could have deleted any
one of these roads, say 3 to 4 or 2 to 3 and
still one can get from any of these four towns
to any four other towns in the district.
So, removing an edge from a loop cannot disconnect
a graph and our aim is to find some sub set
of edges within this graph which are connected
in such a way that this is a minimal such
set of edges.
So, what we want is a connected sub graph
of this original graph which does not have
any loops which is acyclic and this is precisely
what is called a tree.
So, tree by definition is a connected acyclic
graph.
And in particular, we start to the arbitrary
graph and we are looking for a tree which
sits inside the graph, which is a sub graph
in terms of the number of the edges, which
connects all the vertices in the original
graph.
So, such a tree is called a spanning tree,
it spans the vertices of the original graph,
but it forms a tree out of the sub set of
three edges.
So, in this graph for instance, one spanning
tree we could form, are red edges shown here,
1 to 2, 2 to 3, 3 to 4 and 4 to 5.
Of course, we could form other spanning tree
for instance this is green one, this is 1
to 3, 2 to 3, 2 to 5 and 4 to 5.
So, there are many possible spanning trees
that one can construct on a given graph.
Now, suppose that the graph also has weights.
In this example, the weight for instance could
be the cost of repairing a road.
So, supposing restoring the road has a cost
and now the government would like to not only
restore connectivity, but do it I mean at
minimum cost.
So, if for instance, the government chose
to repair this tree of roads, then the total
cost is 18 plus 6, 24 plus 70, 94 plus 20,
114.
So, it could incur cost of 114 to the store,
this spanning tree.
On the other hand, if the government chooses
green spanning tree, then the cost reduces
to 10 plus 6 is16 plus 20 is 36 plus 8 is
44.
So, different spanning trees now will come
at different cost and the goal would be to
reduce the cost to minimum.
In this particular example, you can check
this green tree, which has cost 44 is actually
the minimum cost spanning tree on this particular
graph.
So, before we move ahead to algorithms to
compute minimum cost spanning trees, let us
look at some basic facts about trees.
So, remember that by definition, a tree is
a connected acyclic graph.
So, the graph in general will have n vertices,
so the claim is that any tree has exactly
n minus 1 edges.
So, this is very easy to prove, there are
many different ways of proving it, here is
one way of thinking about it.
So, supposing we have a tree, so initially
the tree is connected by a definition, so
the entire graph forms one connected component.
Remember, that when we did breadth first and
depth first search, we said that we can take
a node and look at everything connected to
it and it forms a connected component.
So, this tree defines one single connected
component, if you look at it as a graph in
isolation.
Now, because it is a tree, if I have an edge
from i to j, there cannot be any other path
going from i to j by some other edges, because
if not that path plus this edge would form
a cycle.
So, if there is an edge from i to j and I
remove it, then by definition this component
containing i and component containing j must
get disconnected.
So, if I started with one component, now I
get two components.
So, I delete the first edge from the graph
from my tree and I have one component more.
Now, I delete one more edge by the same argument
whichever component that edge belongs will
split again.
So, each time I delete an edge, I increase
a number of components I have, but then, I
know that in the end, if I have n isolated
vertices, I can have utmost n component.
So, I cannot have more than n components,
if I have n vertices.
So, I can only do this deletion n minus one
times.
So, I start with a tree, I keep deleting edges
until everything is disconnected, I can only
do this n minus 1 times and I must do it n
minus 1 times get everything disconnected
therefore, the tree must had exactly n minus
1 edges.
Now, if I take a tree and then I add an edge,
it must create a cycle, we already saw this
in this previous argument that we said, so
supposing I have a tree, so a tree in general
looks something like this.
So, it is a graph, it has a kind of no cycles,
but many things branching out.
Now, if anywhere if I create a tree, supposing
I add an edge and supposing I take some i
there and some j here, we may decide to add
an edge.
So, we know that because it is a tree, there
is already connection.
So, there is some path which in this case
to this vertex from i to j.
So, therefore, that path p plus this edge
forms a cyclic.
So, in a tree I have exactly n minus 1 edges
and when I add any extra edge, no matter which
edge I add, it will definitely form a cycle.
So, another consequence of all these definitions
is that between any two paths, any two vertices
in a tree, there can only be one unique path.
So, supposing there are actually two paths,
so let us look at two vertices, here we have
drawn them as i and j and suppose there are
two parts.
So, if I follow the two parts, then it is
very clear that because there are two different
ways are going there, there will be some loops
somewhere in between.
So, notice that it need not to be a loop including
i and j, it could be somewhere in between
i and j, but if you consider all the cases
carefully, you can convince yourself, there
is no way to have two distinct paths from
i to j without creating a loop.
And we have a loop, then the graph is no longer
acyclic, so it is not a tree which is our
assumption to be given.
So, we are actually the following claim that
we have these three properties, that G is
connected, G is acyclic and G has n minus
1 edges, then any of these two implies the
third.
So, G is connected and G is acyclic by definition
it is a tree, we have just shown the first
arguments that any tree has n minus 1 edges.
So, the fact that the first two imply the
third is what we have already shown.
Now, you can easily convince yourself to find
a formal prove that if G is acyclic and has
n minus 1 edges then in fact, it must be connected,
everything must be connected everything.
And finally, if G is connected and it has
n minus 1 edges, then it can be acyclic graph,
it cannot have any graphs.
So, these are various ways of looking at trees
and sometimes we might use one property or
another property.
So, it is useful to keep these things in the
back of our mind when we talk about trees
in general.
So, our target right now is to build a minimum
cost spanning tree.
So, there are two naturally greedy strategies
that one can think of.
One is, since you are looking for a minimum
cost tree to start with this smallest stage
and incrementally build the tree.
So, we keep adding edges to the existing tree,
so that the new graph remains a tree and it
grows as little as possible it terms of cost.
This will give raise to an algorithm which
is called primÕs algorithm.
It will also turn out to be very similar to
DijkstraÕs shortest path algorithm with a
single source.
The other strategy we can have is to look
at edges in ascending order of cost and keep
adding them, so long as we do not violate
the tree property.
Now, this is different from PrimÕs Algorithm,
because here we do not built a tree to start
with, we keep adding edges, so that we do
not create a cycle, but we could have disconnected
groups of edges, but eventually there will
all connected to form a tree.
So, we will see these in more detail in the
next 2 lectures, but let us just look at an
initiative example of how these two strategies
work.
So, let us look at these two algorithms intuitively
we will come to them more detail later, so
let us start with PrimÕs Algorithm.
Remember that the strategy in PrimÕs Algorithm
is to start with the smallest weight edge
and then incrementally grow a tree.
So, we start with a smallest edge here which
is the edge weight 6 between 2 and 3.
Now, we have to look at the existing tree
which consists of this part of the graph and
decide whether to add one of these four edges
to extend it.
We cannot add that edge over here, we cannot
add this edge, because it would not form a
tree, it would be disconnected from this edges.
So, we can add any of these, but we choose
the smallest one.
So, in this case, we choose the edge with
weight 10.
So, the next step in the tree is to add the
edges 1, 2 and now, we have this tree.
Now, if we look at possible edges that we
can add, we have this edge, we have this edge
and we have this edge.
Now, the smallest among these is the edges
with weight 18, but if I had that we get a
cycle.
So, this is not a good edge to add.
So, therefore, we must add one of the other
2, again to pick the smaller one, which in
this case is the edge labeled with weight
20.
So, then we get this tree which has now this
shape, this is a given tree.
Now, we can add, we cannot add this is we
know.
So, we can either add the edges 70 or the
edges labeled with weight 8 and obviously
8 is smaller.
So, finally, we add that in this is a tree
that we can get.
So, this is the final tree, we get from PrimÕs
Algorithm, let us starting from the smallest
edge and incrementally growing the tree.
The other strategy we said was to start with
the edges in ascending order.
So, we start with edges with it, then 8, then
there mean.
So, we have this is the first one, this is
the second one and this is third one and so
on.
So, we consider the edges in this order, 1,
2, 3, 4, 5 and 6.
So, we have the weights in 18, 20, then finally
70.
So, every 6 edges when we consider them in
this order, so among these of course, if smallest
is 6, so we add.
So, this is the starter of our tree, now the
next one is 8 and that does not form a cycle,
it does not violate a tree property.
So, we add that, notice now the crucial difference
between PrimÕs and KruskalÕs algorithm at
this point, we do not have a tree, we have
two separate trees in some sense.
So, we have two different acyclic component
within this graph which are not connected
each other, but we are just going in order
of an edges.
So, next we will see 10 is the next edges
that we can add, this does not form a cycle.
So, we add that, so in some sense, we have
grown this component and left that component
grown.
Now, the next one would be 18, but if you
add 18, it would form a cycle.
So, we skip 18, we move to the next one, this
is 20, 20 is fine and 20 will in fact, connect
the two component to form a tree.
So, we add 20, now we are done, because we
have added n minus 1 edges, there are five
vertices, we got 4 edges and therefore, we
are definitely got a tree.